JEREMY: Hi.
In any high-level
programming language,
there are various
number like types.
In Haskell, for instance,
we have seen Int so far.
There are also float and
infinite precision integers,
like BigIntegers in Java
to name a few more types.
Now, here is a key insight.
Many arithmetic functions
can be applied to values
from any number like type,
for example, addition
or multiplication.
Here's 2 + 2, which makes 4.
Here is 2 + pi, which
makes 5.1415, and so on.
Here's 2 * 2, which makes 4.
And here's 2 * pi, which
makes 6.2831, so on.
This is where the notion of
type classes comes in handy.
A type class specifies
a family of types
that provide implementations
for common functions.
Let's have a look
at the type of (+).
Sorry, I need to put
(+) inside brackets
because it's an infix operator.
This says, given a type
a-- some people pronounce
this as alpha-- given a type
a belonging to the Num type
class, then the + function takes
two a parameters and returns an
a result. a is a type variable.
The part of the type
before the double arrow
here is called the
context of the type.
This expresses type
class membership
for type variables like a.
So a type class is a generalized
family of similar types.
Let's think about some
other the type classes.
The Eq type class means we can
compare values of such types
equality with the (==) operator.
We see that given the context
of the type a that is
an instance of
the Eq type class,
then the (==) function takes two
parameters of type a and return
to Boolean result.
So we can see that ints are an
instance of the Eq type class.
The Ord type class means we
can order values of such types
with relational operators like
less than and greater than.
This is like the
IComparable interface in C#.
For strings, less than
implements a lexicographic
ordering.
The Show type class means we
can generate string values that
represent values of such
types, like toString() in Java.
So if I say, show
42 integer value,
then I get back the string 42.
If I say show False, I
get back the string False.
The Read type class means we can
generate values of such types
from string values.
So I'm going to say
read "1" so string.
Now, this doesn't
work at the moment
because I need to say
that the thing I'm reading
should be of type Int.
Now, it works.
Again, I could say read "True,"
which should be of type Bool,
and I get back a
Boolean type-- rather,
a value of a Boolean type.
To specify that a type belongs
to a type class, for now,
we will use the deriving
clause in the type definition.
Let's go back to
our SimpleNum class.
Remember, we can only count
values One, Two, and Many.
Data SimpleNum = One, Two, Many.
And this type is
deriving (Show, Read).
The set of type classes that
this type is an instance of
are in parentheses in
the deriving clause.
Now, this means we can convert
SimpleNum values into strings
using the show function,
and vice versa using
the read function.
Let's say show One,
show Two, show Many.
And in each case,
we return a string.
Let's try to read "One".
We get an error
because read doesn't
know what the type of One
to be-- the string One
to be-- when we read it.
So let's say we want this
to be of type SimpleNum,
and how it works.
Let's try comparing SimpleNum
values for equality.
Does One == One?
No.
Look at the error message.
SimpleNum types are not
instances of the Eq type class.
So let's add the Eq type
class to the deriving clause
in the SimpleNum
type definition.
Look, now, we have three type
classes (Show, Read, Eq).
Does One == One now?
Yes, it does.
Does One == Two?
No, it doesn't.
Does One == "One"?
No, because SimpleNums
are of a different type
two strings, which
a character lists.
Again, there's a default
implementation of ==,
which is being used
to compare SimpleNums.
There is a mechanism for
defining type class function
implementations, but we'll
save this discussion for later
on in the course.
Note that type classes were
one of the early innovations
of the Haskell
programming language.
The type class
constrains member types
to provide functions that
conform to certain type
signatures effectively,
API constraints.
This is a little like
object-oriented programming.
Type classes are like
interfaces in C# and Java.
Types in the type class are
like concrete implementations
of the interface.
Type classes provide
a neat mechanism
to enable operator overloading
in the Haskell language.
We've seen this with
functions like ==,
and relational operators, and
the show and read functions.
We'll explore type
classes in more detail
later on in the course.
But for now, goodbye.